About Sunan Abi Dawud
Sunan Abī Dāwūd is a collection of ḥadīth compiled by Imām Abū Dāwūd Sulaymān ibn al-Ash`ath as-Sijistānī (raḥimahullāh). It is widely considered to be among the six canonical collections of ḥadīth (Kutub as-Sittah) of the Sunnah of the Prophet (saws). It consists of 5274 aḥādīth in 43 books.

Author bio:
Abū Dāwūd Sulaymān ibn al-Ash`ath ibn Isḥāq ibn Bashīr ibn Shaddād ibn `Amr ibn `Imrān al-Azdī as-Sijistānī was born in the year 202 AH in Sijistan, a province in Khurasan (a region covering parts of present-day Iran and Afghanistan). He was from the Azd tribe of Yemen.

He began to travel seeking aḥādīth at a young age, and reached Baghdad in 220 AH when he was 18 years old. He traveled for the purpose of checking out the possessors of aḥādīth to ensure their reliability before accepting their narrations. His journeys in search of knowledge took him through the lands of Khurasan, Iraq, Hijaz, Sham, Egypt, and Nishapur. He was not only a muḥaddith, but also a prominent faqīh who studied extensively under Imām Aḥmad ibn Hanbal.

His Virtues:
Imām an-Nawawī states: “All the scholars are unanimous on the rank and virtue of Abū Dāwūd. He has been praised for his perfect memory and deep knowledge. He possessed a sound mind and perfect intellect. Moreover, he was an Imām in the various sciences. All of this, along with his piety and abstinence made him one of the greatest scholars of his time.” Adh-Dhahabī said: “Abū Dāwūd was among the greatest of scholars. It has been said that Abū Dāwūd resembled Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal in manner, conduct and habits. And in that, Aḥmad resembled Wakī`, who resembled Sufyān, who resembled Manṣūr, who resembled Ibrāhīm an-Nakha`ī, who resembled `Alqamah, who resembled `Abdullāh ibn Mas`ūd. `Alqamah said: ‘`Abdullāh ibn Mas`ūd resembled the Prophet (saws) in his manners, conduct and habits.’”

Once Imām Abū Dāwūd was on board a ship when he heard a person on the shore sneeze and say "Alhamdulillah" (all praise and gratitude belongs to Allah alone). He hired a smaller boat for one dirham to row all the way to the shore just to reply "Yarhamukallah" (may Allah have mercy on you) to the person’s sneeze. On returning, when asked about his action, he answered: “It is possible that the person who sneezed was one whose supplications are readily accepted by Allah.” That night, everyone on the ship heard a voice in their sleep calling out: “Oh people of the ship! Abū Dāwūd has purchased his Jannah from Allah (swt) for one dirham.”

Imām Abū Dāwūd (raḥimahullāh) passed away on Friday, 16 Shawwal 275 AH, at the age of 73. He was buried in Basrah alongside Sufyān at-Thawrī.

Teachers and Students:
He studied under around 300 great scholars of his time. Some of his famous teachers include Imām Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal, Musaddad ibn Musarhad, Yaḥya ibn Ma`īn, Qutaibah ibn Sa`īd, Abū Bakr ibn Abī Shaibah, `Uthmān ibn Abī Shaibah, `Ali ibn al-Madīnī, `Abdullāh ibn Maslamah al-Qa`nabī, Sulaymān ibn Ḥarb, Abul Walīd aṭ-Ṭayālisī, Isḥāq ibn Ibrāhīm, Muslim ibn Ibrāhīm, and Abū Ja`far an-Nufailī.

He had numerous students from around the world. Among his more noted students are his son Abū Bakr `Abdullāh ibn Abī Dāwūd, Imām at-Tirmidhī, Imām an-Nasā’ī, Abū `Alī Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad al-Lu’lu’ī, Abū Sa`īd Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn al-A`rābī, Abū Bakr Muḥammad ibn Bakr ibn Dāsah, Abū `Īsa Isḥāq ibn Mūsa ar-Ramlī, Abū Bakr ibn Abi ad-Dunyā, Abu at-Tīb Aḥmad ibn Ibrāhīm ibn al-Ashnānī al-Baghdādī, Abu al-Ḥasan `Alī ibn al-Ḥasan ibn al-`Abd al-Anṣārī, Abū `Amr Aḥmad ibn `Alī ibn al-Ḥasan al-Baṣarī, and Imām Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal. Imām Aḥmad was his teacher, but has also narrated one ḥadīth from him, thus making him his student as well.

The Sunan:
When Imām Abū Dāwūd compiled his Sunan, Ibrāhīm al-Ḥarbi stated: “Ḥadīth was made supple (easy) for Abū Dāwūd just as ḥadīd (steel) was made supple for the Prophet Dāwūd (as).” When the Sunan was read out to Ibn al-A`rābī, he commented: “If a man had nothing with him except for the Book of Allah, and this book (of Abū Dāwūd), he would need absolutely nothing else to go along with them.”

In compiling the Sunan, Imām Abū Dāwūd included only those aḥādīth that fall under topics of Fiqh. He included only one or two aḥādīth under each chapter to make the collection concise and easy to derive fiqh.

He occasionally summarized long aḥādīth for brevity, so that the fiqh didn't get lost in the long narration. In his Sunan, he included several aḥādīth that are mursal in instances where he did not know of a contradictory hadith with a connected chain. He did not include aḥādīth from those considered matrūk al-ḥādīth (a narrator whose aḥādīth are rejected). He included a munkar (mistaken or rejected) ḥādīth only when there were no other ḥādīth in that topic. In such cases, he clearly mentioned that the ḥādīth is munkar. He also included some weak aḥādīth in his Sunan, clearly mentioning their weakness. Al Ḥāfiẓ `Abdullāh ibn Mandah said: “Abū Dāwūd narrated weak chains of narration when he did not find anything else for the topic, because to him, weak aḥādīth were stronger than the opinions of men.” For more information on his methodology in compiling his Sunan, see his letter to the people of Makkah.

According to his student, Ibn Dāsah, Imām Abū Dāwūd said: “I have written 500,000 aḥādīth of Allah’s Messenger (saws), from which I selected 4800 of the most authentic aḥādīth for this book (the Sunan). Of these, four aḥādīth are sufficient for preserving one’s Deen:
‘Actions are judged according to intentions.’
‘Of the beauty of a person’s Islam is his leaving out that which does not concern him.’
‘None of you can be a perfect believer until he loves for his brother that which he loves for himself.’
‘The halal is clear and the haram is clear, and between these two are unclear matters. Whoever saves himself from these has saved his Deen.’”

His Other Works:
Other than his Sunan, Imām Abū Dāwūd’s famous works include his letter to the people of Makkah explaining the conditions he adhered to in compiling his Sunan, and Masā’il al-Imām Aḥmad. He also authored At-Tafarrud, Al-Marāsīl, A`lām an-Nubuwwah, Az-Zuhd, and An-Nāsikh wal-Mansūkh.

About Sunan Abi Dawud
The Letter of Imam Abu Dawud as-Sijistani to the People of Makkah Describing His Sunan
Narrated by Abul-Husayn ibn Jumay' from Muhammad ibn ‘Abdil-‘Aziz al-Hashimi from him:

In the Name of Allah, ar-Rahman, ar-Rahim
And there is no might or power except by Allah

Shaykh Abul-Fath Muhammad ibn ‘Abdil-Baqi ibn Ahmad ibn Sulayman, known as ibnul-Bati, informed us by way of ijazah, if I did not in fact hear it from him, saying: Shaykh Abul-Fadhl Ahmad ibn al-Hasan ibn Khayrun al-Mu'addal reported to us, by way of someone reading to him while I was present listening, it was said to him: You had it read upon Abu ‘Abdillah Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn ‘Abdillah as-Suri al-Hafidh, saying: I heard Abul-Husayn Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Jumay' al-Ghassani at Sayda, and he confirmed it, saying: I heard Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn ‘Abdil-‘Aziz ibn Muhammad ibn al-Fadhl ibn Yahya ibn al-Qasim ibn ‘Awn ibn ‘Abdillah ibn al-Harith ibn Nawfal ibn al-Harith ibn ‘Abdil-Muttalib al-Hashimi at Makkah saying:

I heard Abu Dawud Sulayman ibn al-Ash'ath ibn Ishaq ibn Bashir ibn Shaddad as-Sijistani at al-Basrah, and he was asked about his letter which he wrote to the people of Makkah and other than it, in response to them, so he dictated to us:

Peace be upon you. Indeed, I extol and praise Allah to you, the one whom there is no deity worthy of worship except for Him, and I ask Him to send salah upon Muhammad, His Slave and His Messenger, may Allah send Salah and peace upon him whenever he is mentioned.

As to what proceeds:

May Allah grant us a pardon which is not accompanied by anything displeasing and after which there shall be no punishment. Indeed, you asked me to discuss the hadiths in Kitab as-Sunan, whether they are the most sahih of what I know concerning each topic, and I came upon all of that which you mentioned.

So know that that is the case except if it should have been related from two sahih routes, one of them having a better chain while the narrator of the other is stronger in hifdh, so I occasionally would write that, and I do not see in my book even ten hadiths that are like this.

And I only wrote one or two hadiths concerning each bab, even if there were a number of sahih hadiths concerning that bab, for there would be too many and my intent was to make it (the book) easy to benefit from.

And when I repeated a hadith in any bab from two or three routes, then it is only due to additional speech contained, and perhaps it contains one additional word not in the other hadiths.

And occasionally, I summarized a long hadith for if I were to write it completely, some of those who heard it would not understand the place of fiqh in it, so I summarized it for that reason.

And as for mursal hadiths, then the scholars of the past such as Sufyan ath-Thawri, Malik ibn Anas, and al-Awza'i used to use them as a proof until ash-Shafi'i came and criticized them (the mursal hadiths) and Ahmad ibn Hanbal and others followed him in that, may Allah be pleased with them.

So when there is no musnad hadith in opposition to the mursal hadiths and there is no musnad hadith to be found, then the mursal is used as a proof, and it is not like the muttasil in strength.

And Kitab as-Sunan which I have compiled does not contain narrations from a person who is matruk al-hadith. And when there was any munkar hadith in it, I clarified that it was munkar and that there was nothing like it in that bab.

And only a small portion of these are hadiths are to be found in the book of ibn al-Mubarak or the book of Waki', and what is generally in their books is mursal hadiths. And Kitab as-Sunan contains (a good bit) of hadiths from the Muwatta' of Malik ibn Anas and likewise from the works of Hammad ibn Salamah and ‘Abdur-Razzaq. And a third of these books, in my estimation, are not to be found in all of their books – I mean the work of Malik ibn Anas, Hammad ibn Salamah, and ‘Abdur-Razzaq.

And I have authored it depending upon what I have gathered, so if some sunnah is mentioned to you from the Prophet (sall Allahu `alaihi wa sallam) which I did not report, then know it is a waahi hadith, except if it should be in my book from another route, for I did not seek to report all the routes for that becomes too much for the student.

And I do not know of anyone who has gathered in a comprehensive manner other than myself. And al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Khallal had gathered of them some nine hundred hadiths and he mentioned that ibn al-Mubarak said that the sunan from the Prophet (sall Allahu `alaihi wa sallam) are about nine hundred hadiths so it was said to him, “Abu Yusuf said that they are one thousand and one hundred.” Ibn al-Mubarak said, “Abu Yusuf accepts those defective ones from here and there from the weak hadiths.”

And any hadith in my book that contains a severe weakness, then I have explained it, and from it is that which does not have an authentic isnad. And whatever I did not mention anything about, then it is salih, and some of them (the hadiths) are more sahih than others. And if other than myself had compiled this, I would have said more about it.

And you will not find any sunnah from the Prophet ( sall Allahu `alaihi wa sallam) with a salih isnad except that it is in this book, except if it should be some point that is extracted from the hadith, and this hardly ever occurs.

And I do not know of anything after the Qur'an that it is more necessary for the people to learn than this book, and it would not harm a person if he does not write anything of knowledge after writing these books. And when he looks into it and contemplates it and seeks to understand it, he will then know its value. And as for these fiqh issues, the issues of ath-Thawri, Malik, and ash-Shafi'i, then these hadiths are their basis. And I like that a man should write the opinions of the Companions of the Prophet (sall Allahu `alaihi wa sallam) along with these books.

And he should also write the likes of the Jami' of Sufyan ath-Thawri, for it is the best of what the people have compiled of Jawami'.

And the hadiths that I have placed in Kitab as-Sunan, most of them are mashahir, and they are with everyone who has written any hadiths, except that not all the people are able to distinguish between them. And the thing to be boasted about with these hadiths is that they are mashahir, for a gharib hadith is not used as a proof, even if it is from the narration of Malik, Yahya ibn Sa'id, and the thiqat from the Imams of knowledge.

And if a person were to use a gharib hadith as a proof, you would find those who criticize him and do not rely upon the hadith he used as a proof when the hadith is gharib, shadh.

As for the mash-hur, muttasil, sahih hadith, then none is able to reject it from you. And Ibrahim an-Nakha'i said, “They used to detest the gharib hadiths.” And Yazid ibn Abi Habib said, “When you hear a hadith, then announce it loudly like you would a lost animal, so either it is recognized, otherwise, leave it.”

And there are some hadiths in my book, as-Sunan, which are not muttasil but are mursal or mudallas, and that is when sahih hadiths are not to be found with most of the People of Hadith that are regarded as muttasil. And this is such as the narrations of al-Hasan from Jabir or al-Hasan from Abu Hurayrah, and the narrations of al-Hakam from Miqsam from ibn ‘Abbas while al-Hakam only heard four hadiths from Miqsam.

As for the narrations of Abu Ishaq from al-Harith from ‘Ali, then Abu Ishaq only heard four hadiths from al-Harith, amongst which there is not a single musnad hadith. As for Kitab as-Sunan, then the hadiths in it that are like this are few. And perhaps al-Harith does not have but a single hadith in Kitab as-Sunan, for I only wrote it belatedly.

And occasionally there was something that established the authenticity of a hadith, so when that was hidden to me, then occasionally I left the hadith off when I did not understand it, and occasionally I wrote it and clarified that. And perhaps I did not come across it, and occasionally I refrain from these types of matters for it is harmful for the common people for all of the deficiencies that were present in hadiths to be revealed to them because the knowledge of the common people falls short of this.

And the number of the books of the sunan is eighteen juz', one juz' of which is marasil. And of the marasil that have been narrated from the Prophet (sall Allahu `alaihi wa sallam), there are those that are not authentic, and there is that which is musnad from other than it, and it it muttasil sahih. And perhaps the number of hadiths in my books are four thousand and eight hundred hadiths, and about six hundred hadiths from marasil.

And whoever would like to distinguish between these hadiths along with their wordings, then occasionally a hadith comes from a particular route while the common people have it from the route of the Imams who are well known, except that occasionally he may have sought after a particular wording which has many meanings and from those you know are those who have narrated from all these books.

So occasionally there will come an isnad while it is known from another narration that it is not muttasil, and it will not be clear to the listener except if he knows the hadiths and he has knowledge concerning them so that he would come across the like of that which has been narrated from ibn Jurayj, he said, “I was informed from az-Zuhri,” while al-Barsani narrates it from ibn Jurayj, from az-Zuhri.

So the one who hears would think it is muttasil, and it is not sahih at all, so we only left it off because the asl of the hadith is not muttasil and is not sahih. And it is a ma'lul hadith, and there are many cases like this.

And the one who does not know will say, “He has left a sahih hadith concerning this and brought a ma'lul hadith.”

And I did not gather anything except the ahkam in Kitab as-Sunan, and I did not gather the books of Zuhd, Fadha'il al-A'mal, and other than them. So these four thousand and eight hundred are all concerning ahkam. So as for the many sahih hadiths concerning Zuhd, Fada'il, and other than this, I did not report them.

And peace be upon you, and the Mercy of Allah, and His Blessings, and may Allah send salah upon our master Muhammad, the Prophet, and upon his family, and may He grant them complete peace. And Allah is Sufficient for us, and the Best Disposer of Affairs.
